+++
title = 'Art From Chaos'
date = 2023-03-04T14:50:59+01:00
type = 'Article'
tags = ['Genetic Algorithm', 'Art']
images = []

show_table_of_contents = true

disqus_identifier = '1e754cb984f27b08d63701218e59a290'
## Optional, will use <title> tag value instead.
# disqus_title = ''
## Optional, will use window.location.href instead.
# disqus_url = ''
show_disqus = true
show_comment_count = true

share_buttons = ['facebook', 'twitter']

draft = true
+++

Making art is hard. Drawing pictures is tedious. With programming, however, we can automate things and the point of
automation is to reduce the amount of manual labor. So let's mix evolution, DNA, and programming together to make art
that _makes_ itself. Pictures that _draw_ themselves.

<!--more-->

## Concepts and definitions

Before we dive deep into making art, we need to understand some important concepts -- first things first.
{{< underline >}}Automatic art{{< /underline >}}[^1], at its core, uses generic algorithms.
[Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Genetic_algorithm) has a really nice page about them. If you'd like to For the
sake of this article this is enough:

A **Genetic Algorithm** is a algorithm inspired by the process of natural selection used to find solutions for
optimization problems. It has three main parts:

* **Mutation** - during which specimens are randomly changed,
* **Scoring** - during which specimens are ranked by their "ability to adapt to their environment",
* **Crossing** - during which one or more specimens are mixed together to produce a new member.

OK. :ok_hand:

With these terms out of the way, let's try to understand how exactly it works. Imagine we need to find a solution
for a problem. It can be anything, like finding optimal timetable for a university class. Firstly, we need to encode a
solution as a series of bytes (their [Genetic representation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Genetic_representation), if
you will). Once we have that we can clone that encoded representation to create a generation.  
Each member of the generation will be randomly **mutated** and then **scored** based on how well they fit in our
constrains set. For example: we might want to have a timetable which leaves just enough break time to eat a quick lunch,
but not too much, so that we can go home earlier. This (and similar constrains) might be used to evaluate the value of
our new mutated timetable. With each specimen evaluated we leave a few of the best and discard the rest :skull:.  
The last step is to mix our _special_ timetables to create new ones to fill the generation again.

<!-- TODO: Add circular diagram showing cycle of life. -->

To mutate, to score, to kill, to breed, to continue the cycle of life. It might sound simple, but in reality it is
shockingly efficient in searching the solution space.

## Art from evolution

Alright. Now with the theory out of the way, let's conceptualize a program for generating automatic art. Probably it's
a good moment to explain the clickbaity summary at the top of this article: the pictures will not _draw_ themselves, the
goal is to make _a program_ which will generate art automatically. It's going to be an iterative solution where each
cycle is parametrized by the results of its predecessor.

### Step 0: Initialization

### Step 1: Mutation

### Step 2: Scoring

### Step 3: Crossing

## Next steps

<!-- Footnotes -->

[^1]: Term coined by me. If you want to read more about art generated by algorithms you should probably look for
[Algorithmic art](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Algorithmic_art).
